gargle 1.2.0 (#521)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/gargle-1-2-0/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: gargle-1-2-0
title: gargle 1.2.0
date: 2021-07-01
author: Jenny Bryan
description: >

>     A 2-3 sentence description of the post that appears on the articles page.

Reviewer: Needs update

    This can be omitted if it would just recapitulate the title.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/n6vS3xlnsCc
  author: Kelley Bozarth

categories: [package] 
---

<!--
TODO:

> * [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml

Reviewer: Are these done?

* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

We're psyched to announce the release of [gargle](https://gargle.r-lib.org) 1.2.0.
gargle is meant to take some of the pain out of working with Google APIs and is mostly aimed at the *maintainers* of R packages that call Google APIs.

Packages that use gargle internally include [bigrquery](https://bigrquery.r-dbi.org), [gmailr](https://gmailr.r-lib.org), [googleAuthR](https://code.markedmondson.me/googleAuthR/), [googledrive](https://googledrive.tidyverse.org), and [googlesheets4](https://googlesheets4.tidyverse.org).
Users of those packages, especially those who take an interest in the details around auth, may want to read on.

You can install gargle from CRAN with:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
install.packages("gargle")
```

I last blogged about gargle in [August 2019, around the release of v0.3.1](https://www.tidyverse.org/blog/2019/08/gargle-hello-world/).
There have been several releases since then and this post highlights important changes across all of them.

You can see a full list of changes in the [release notes](https://gargle.r-lib.org/news/index.html).

```{r setup, include = FALSE}

> # TODO: probably delete this chunk; no one uses gargle directly

Reviewer: 👍

```{r echo = FALSE, out.width = '100%', fig.cap = "Typical OAuth dance in the browser, when initiated from within R"}
knitr::include_graphics("oauth-dance-web-flow.png")
```

Upon success, you see this message in the browser:

```
Authentication complete. Please close this page and return to R.
```

The dance concludes with gargle (or a wrapper package) in possession of a [Google user token](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/oauth2#installed).
This credential usually comes with an access token, which is valid for about an hour, and a more persistent refresh token, which can be used to get new access tokens in the future.
It is nice to store this refresh token somewhere, to reduce future friction for this user.
We'll refer to this "somewhere" as the *oauth token cache*.

One of the original motivations for the gargle package was to depart from httr's behaviour around token caching, which defaults to the current working directory.[^1]
By default, gargle caches user tokens centrally, at the user level, and their keys or labels also convey which Google identity is associated with each token.

> This reduces the chance of accidentally sending tokens to remote servers (like DropBox or GitHub), increases the ability to reuse tokens across multiple R projects, and makes it easier to use multiple identities within a single project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This reduces the chance of accidentally sharing tokens with others (e.g. via DropBox or GitHub), increases the ability to reuse tokens across multiple R projects, and makes it easier to use multiple identities within a single project.
```

Author: I chose a slightly different rewording based on "exposing" your tokens.

> [^1]: The successor to httr is under development and it will also cache user tokens at the user level, like gargle.

Author: I kinda want to allude to httr2, but without drawing undue, premature attention to it.

Reviewer: I think it's fine to link to it; it's not a secret.

  token is created and when it is (re)used. gargle is now able to recognize and
  cope with the most predictable and harmless effects of moving a token across
  time or space.
* gargle is quite conservative about using cached tokens and likes to have
  explicit permission from the user. However, this is in tension with the desire
  to make things "just work". Balancing these two goals is an ongoing effort:
  - In a non-interactive context, gargle will use a cached token, if it can
    find (at least) one, even if the user has not given explicit instructions.
    However, we complain noisily and urge the user to make their intent
    unambiguous in the code. This comes up, for example, when rendering R
    Markdown documents.
  - You can now identify the token you want to use with a domain-only glob-like
    pattern. This makes it possible to successfully execute code like this,
    non-interactively, on the machines of both `alice@example.com` and
    `bob@example.com`.
    
    ```{r, eval = FALSE}
    library(googledrive)
    
    # googledrive uses gargle for auth
    drive_auth(email = "*@example.com")
    ```

## Rolling the built-in OAuth client

> User tokens created with gargle are the result of so-called "three-legged OAuth", where the three legs are the user, Google, and an OAuth client (id and secret).

Reviewer: "3-legged" is an outdated term; I'd suggest re-using "OAuth dance" from above

Author: Reworded.

Each user or application potentially needs to set up their own OAuth client, in order to execute this flow.

A small set of packages maintained by the tidyverse team make use of a shared, built-in OAuth client, which helps new users get started quickly, without the need to create their own client in order to do "Hello, World!".
Only these specific packages are allowed to use this client and these packages do so according to a specific [privacy policy](https://www.tidyverse.org/google_privacy_policy/).
The "Tidyverse API Packages" are [bigrquery](https://bigrquery.r-dbi.org/), [googledrive](https://googledrive.tidyverse.org/), and [googlesheets4](https://googlesheets4.tidyverse.org/).[^2]

[^2]: gmailr is not included here, because the Gmail scopes are so sensitive that anyone wishing to work with Gmail programmatically really must set up their own OAuth client.

As of gargle v1.0.0, released in March 2021, we have rolled the "Tidyverse API Packages" client, i.e. we are using a new one.

> Although we have not yet disabled the previous client, users should be prepared for it to stop working at any time.

Author: I wonder if we should set a date for this 🤔

Reviewer: If we do so, it probably needs to be its own blog post or VERY PROMINENT in this one.

Author: One dilemma is that I suspect many of the people who need to know ... don't even know they need to know.

That is, disabling to the old client is going to cause some pain and I don't think there's any way to prevent most of it, regardless of the announcement strategy.

But yeah, I agree that a separate blog post makes sense, in addition to hammering on this here and in future posts for googledrive/googlesheets4/bigrquery.

Author: I've mentioned December 31, 2021 as the date now and alluded to a future blog post.

> We use nicknames to keep track of the built-in client; the new one is known as "tidyverse-calliope", which is replacing the older "tidyverse-clio".

Reviewer: Can we change this nickname? Might be nice to give a name starting with a d to gently imply some alphabetical progression.

Author: I'm going through the Nine Muses in alphabetical order!!

THERE IS A PLAN 😁

I don't think it's practical to change now, as the current client has been out there, with this nickname, for several months. I don't want to re-nickname it, nor do I want to introduce a 3rd live client at this time.

Reviewer: If it was alphabetical, wouldn't Clio come after Calliope?

Author: Yeah that was just a typing error in the post. Fixed now.

There is a cost, of course, which is that this auth method requires substantial configuration on both the GCP and AWS sides.

`credentials_external_account()` is a new function that implements workload identity federation.
`credentials_external_account()` has been inserted into the default registry of credential-fetchers tried by `token_fetch()`, which makes it automatically available in packages that use gargle for auth, such as bigrquery. `credentials_app_default()` recognizes the JSON configuration for an external account and passes such a call along to `credentials_external_account()`.
This means that, when placed in one of the locations searched by the Application Default Credential strategy, an external account configuration file will be automatically discovered.

This new feature is still experimental and currently only supports AWS.
This blog post provides a good high-level introduction to workload identity federation:

* [Keyless API authentication—Better cloud security through workload identity federation, no service account keys necessary](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/enable-keyless-access-to-gcp-with-workload-identity-federation)

> ## Out of bound auth

Author: I sort of think this needs a little graphic similar to the first, but haven't motivated myself to make it yet.

The browser-based OAuth dance described above is, ironically, not fully available when you are using R inside a web browser, as is the case for RStudio Workbench, Server, and Cloud.

> When working on these platforms, you need to use the **"out of bound" (oob)** auth flow, in which a token is made available for you to copy and paste into R.

Reviewer: Is this the (no longer recommended) oob flow or the device flow?

Author: It's whatever you get with this: `httr::oauth2.0_token(..., use_oob = TRUE)`.

https://httr.r-lib.org/reference/oauth2.0_token.html

I don't know if that's "the (no longer recommended) oob flow or the device flow", but am happy to learn.

Instead of possibly failing with an inscrutable error, `gargle::gargle_oob_default()` has gotten smarter about figuring out whether oob is needed:

* We now (try to) detect if we're running on RStudio Workbench, Server, or Cloud
  and, if so, `gargle_oob_default()` returns `TRUE` unconditionally.
* We honor the `"httr_oob_default"` option, when set, if the option
  `"gargle_oob_default"` is unset. Previously, we only consulted the gargle
  option, but it makes sense to honor httr's as well.

### Suggesting httpuv

The slick in-browser OAuth flow described at the start of the post -- i.e., the nicer *alternative* to oob auth -- requires the httpuv package.
Sometimes users who could enjoy this flow don't have httpuv installed and end up with the clunky oob auth flow, for no good reason.
This is a shame, as the experience is definitely inferior.

We've taken a few measures to encourage these folks to install httpuv and enjoy a happier auth life:

* Previously, httpuv was only indirectly suggested by gargle, via httr.
  gargle now lists httpuv in its own `Suggests` field.
* We encourage the installation of httpuv in interactive sessions, if we're

>   about to initiate oob auth, when it seems like we don't have to.

Author: I guess I could show what this looks like.

* `gargle_verbosity()` reports the current verbosity level.
* `with_gargle_verbosity()` and `local_gargle_verbosity()` are
  [withr-style](https://withr.r-lib.org) functions that temporarily modify the
  verbosity level.

## Retries

gargle offers some Google-specific support for forming requests and handling responses, in addition to and separate from auth.

Not all wrapper packages use this functionality, but, in particular, googlesheets4 *does*.
The [usage limits for the Sheets API](https://developers.google.com/sheets/api/reference/limits) are low enough that regular folks run up against them fairly often.
This aggravation is somewhat specific to Sheets, i.e. we don't see similar pain with the Drive and BigQuery APIs, which have much more generous limits.
When you hit the Sheets "per user" or "per project" limit, requests fail with the error code `429 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED`.[^3]

[^3]: There is a limit of "500 requests per 100 seconds per project".
In the case of a user token, the "project" refers to the GCP project that owns the OAuth client.
Everyone who uses the built-in "Tidyverse API Packages" OAuth client is sharing this "per project" quota!

> If you're hitting "per project" limits regularly and it upsets your workflow, the universe is telling you that it's time to configure your own OAuth client or use a different method of auth.

Reviewer: This seems important enough to go in the body?

Author: OK I'll move. I felt sheepish re: how Sheets-specific this was.

`request_retry()` is a drop-in substitute for `request_make()` that uses (modified) exponential backoff to retry requests that fail with error `429`.
`request_retry()` even has some special knowledge about the Sheets limits and, in some cases, will wait 100 seconds for the user's quota to reset.

The development version of googlesheets4 already uses `request_retry()`, which will be released to CRAN soon.

> `request_retry()` will support error codes beyond `429` in the next gargle release.

Author: Again, I sort of want to allude to the fact that retry support will get much richer, without saying exactly how that will come about.
